Before anything...
you want to translate or timestamp a vtuber? thats really cool and you will help a lot of people
but first of all... why?
do you want fame?
do you want being recognized or having some compliments from your oshi?
if your answer is yes, dont do it, you wont go far, you are doing this because you want, no one owes you anything for translating
and it wont give you fame (most likely), no one is obligated to recognize you for your work,and even if they do
 its a lot of work that you have to do, and that attitude wont get you far. Its a lot of work and most of the times can be
not as rewarding.
 I recommend you to have a good reason to do it
i ll tell you mine, ame's chat wasnt the best back then, i knew i was nobody, but i wanted to give a better atmosphere to it
i thought that if i could help other people, i would also be helping ame's chat to be more supportive and she could stream without
having to worry about an unruly chat. I also wanted to see more people supporting ame, so any help i could give to take
care of her community would help towards that goal. And at the end of the day, it also if ame enjoys the stream and becomes more interactive
i will also enjoy it more. At the end of the day,i wanted to make of the community a place where others and i could enjoy.
(note that i highly discourage anyone to do what i did of timestamping and translating at the same time,you should keep doing
one thing and keep improving at it, since i started with timestmaps the quality and quantity of my translation decreased and
sometimes affected my enjoyment of the stream because i have to open a lot of tab and keep the stream on a small screen)
anyways, enough about me

When translating or making timestamps you have to keep in mind that you are speaking for the vtuber,if you type something wrong
other people would think that the vtuber said that and could get them in trouble. This is a big responsibility, you are handling
other people words/acts, if you make mistakes it will affect on how other people will see them.
you should ask yourself, are you confident on doing it? if you answer yes, then you are not qualified for this.
this might sound weird, and a bit extremist, but its important to keep in mind that you are not perfect, you are human and
as human you are prone to make mistakes. Being scared of messing it up will help you to reduce the amount of mistakes, will
make you double check and revise the stuff and will help you to keep improving on the way you translate/timestmap.
Last advice, honesty is always needed for your work.

Okay, thats all the rambling, now the real guide on how to use the needed programs:

Timestamps:
people have different ways to do them, i ll tell you the one i use its called timetags for youtube:
https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/timetags-for-youtube/hpbmedimnlknflpbgfbllklgelbnelef#:~:text=TimeTags%20for%20YouTube&text=We%20all%20know%20that%20YouTube,11%3A25%60%20in%20comments.
how does it work?, simple you activate the extension once the stream starts, whenever i find something that i consider relevant
for people who are watching the vod/ key moments of the streams i press the "+" symbol and it will show 
up a blank timestamps,type whats hapenning/ the vtuber saying on that moment. then you have to adjust the timer properly
with alt click on "<" or" >" to adjust the timer for more accuracy.
 Once the stream finished you have to press the printer icon and copy the whole thing on another archive, i recommend you
always revising them, then you can go and post them on the comment section of youtube if you want (keep in mind that
theres banned words that yt never tells you , like llama , 1:10:etc, always revise if the comment isnt shadowbanned.

Live translating: needless to say much, i just copy the language tag and the name of the vtuber and type
tho if you want to make have it easier , i recommend you using this program, here is a tutorial video with the download link:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IqalTPNoh9E&ab_channel=TaishiCh.神代大使

Translating clips: i use this program: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4gXF6Y-v6BE&ab_channel=TJFREE
its easy to use and simple, tho when you are translating clips always make sure to double check and if possible ask to other
people to revise it for mistakes. Keep in mind that this will make a subtitle archive, you will need to find a program to merge the subtitles
with the video (important to keep in mind that you cant upload a clip to youtube thats more than 25% of the total stream,separated
or not, can hit the streamer with copyright)

Hope this guide been useful,this is mostly from my experience and what i read of lyger guides.
